---
layout: post
bigtitle:  "3PL: Terminologies"
categories:
    - study
tags:
  - 3PL
  - industry
comments: true
published: true
---

# 3PL: Terminologies

### Type of Parties
- **Carriers**
- **Shippers/Customers**
- **Brokers**
    - connect shippers and carriers and oversee the movement of freight
    - rarely own warehouses, trucks, or physical freight items.
- **Freight Forwarders**
    - negotiates transportation rates with the carriers
    - contract with a carrier to move the goods.
    - provides cargo insurance to protect the goods transported.
    - take possession of cargo
    - they need warehouses, trucks, packing supplies, and personnel
    - arrange the shipping of freight for their customers
    - may store products for their customers
    - organizes shipments for individuals or corporations to get goods from origin to destination
    - guides through the transportation of customers cargo, requesting the documents customers require for the transportation and border crossing. - advises customers on the rules and procedures for importing and exporting goods to a specific country.

---

### Broker vs. Freight Forwarder
- **Broker**
    - coordinates the connection between shippers and carriers
- **Freight Forwarder**
    - takes possession of the freight and often stores, packs, and ships it.
    - e.g.) Penske, DHL

---

### Type of Trucks
- **Dry Van**
    - most common type of trailer
    - can haul a variety of products, both short and long distances.
    - fully enclosed trailer where the freight is typically loaded and unloaded from the rear of the trailer
    - great job of protecting cargo
- **Flatbed**
    - flat and has open sides and back
    - allows the cargo to be loaded and unloaded from the sides or the back of the trailer without interference from the trailer itself
- **Reefer**
    - refrigerated container 
    - can also carry dry goods and other temperature-sensitive loads
    - more expensive

---

### Back-haul vs. Front-haul vs. Over-haul
- **Back-haul**
    - return trip back from the original destination point to the point of origin
    - Utilizing the backhaul saves time, money, and environmental resources.
- **Front-haul**
    - origin to destination
- **Over-haul**


---

### **Intermodal vs. Multimodal**
- **Intermodal**
    - I thought it referred to "transportation on rails"?????
    - process of moving cargo between a variety of different transportation methods (freight, air, motor carriers, etc.), but all under the same company.
- **Multimodal**
    - similar to intermodal in that it moves cargo via multiple methods
    - but under different companies for each provider

---

### **LIFO vs. FIFO**

- **LIFO**
    - Last In, First Out
    - last products in are the first products shipped out
- **FIFO**
    - First In, First Out
    - first products to come in to the warehouse, are the first products to be shipped out
- Deciding which you want can affect your product’s quality, especially if it’s food-related


---


**Dead-head**
- has no cargo moved within a trip
- e.g) a truck goes from Nashville to Minneapolis with guitars, but it comes back to Nashville empty; that is a dead-head trip.
- happens because of supply and demand; there might be more demand out of China than bringing more products into China.
- Ideally, products coming out would be equal to products coming in for environmental and financial reasons, but often this is not the case.


**FSC (Fuel Surcharge)**
- a fuel fee that accounts for the region and the distance traveled
- price of fuel fluctuates => FSC is negotiable

**Goods in Transit**
- products that have been shipped out but haven’t yet been received by the customer
- also called: transit inventory or stock in transit

 
**Freight Forwarding firms**
- leader in the logistics indstury
- Not 3PL but large companies like DHL that large volumes of goods over land, air, and sea
- combines many goods into large shipments that they can ship for lower rates than competitors
- Their volume allows for them to offer low rates than they could otherwise



**Order Fulfillment**
- kinda like Amazon's fulfillment service where Amazon takes care of shipping your items
- let's say you are a candle-making factory
- when a warehouse or 3PL provider receives your client’s orders through your company and packages and ships it out for you – without you having to touch a single piece of packing tape
- With pandemic, many small online stores are getting bigger, with more orders than they can handle without dedicating their entire home to piles of boxes and stacks of labels


**Kitting**
- when you pre-assemble individual items into ready to ship kits
- great option if you have a top selling order (e.g. your 3 most popular items or a new client gift package) that you ship regularly
- Having your order fulfillment provider kit them upfront will save you time and money in the long-haul.


**Embargo**
- an order to restrict the hauling of cargo
- placed between countries to prohibit exporting or importing in general, or just on a specific product.

**Actual Time of Arrival (A.T.A.)**
- when a container, cargo, railcar, etc. arrives at a certain point

**Cross Docking**
- unloading cargo from a truck and then directly loading it out on outbound trucks with almost no warehouse time in between
- great option for clients who want to reduce costs of warehousing and labor, but the timing needs to be right to send out all the products right away

**Replenishment**
- process of moving products and resources from a secondary warehouse location to the primary warehouse location
- sole mission is to help keep inventory flowing through the supply chain and not skip a beat with the customer’s demands of the product
- Helps keep inventory levels consistent and deliver on client orders in a timely fashion.

**Reverse Logistics**
- managing and focusing on the logistics of the products after the sale (everything from returns, recycling and repairs, to the management and sale of surplus products)
- About 7% of a company’s gross sales are used up by return costs; from managing returns to getting rid of surplus or expired stock

**Pool Distribution**
- Nope. Not a distribution of swimming pools! lol
- regular distribution of orders to multiple destinations within a certain geographic region
- goods are shipped to regional centers to be shipped out regularly to smaller local cities and clients
- Instead of making multiple long-haul trips from Oregon to New Hampshire, a company can have a regional pool distribution center in Connecticut for the entire NE seaboard
- cost saving way to make smaller shipments regularly to many clients.

### Reference: 

- https://citi-cargo.com/
- https://truckstop.com/blog/dry-van-vs-reefer-which-is-best/
- https://mexicomlogistics.com/why-shippers-use-a-freight-forwarder/
