---
layout: post
bigtitle:  "3PL: Pricing 101"
categories:
    - study
tags:
  - 3PL
  - industry
comments: true
published: true
---

# 3PL: Pricing 101

## Spot rates vs. Contract/Primary Rates
- Two ways to price shipment

**Spot rates**
- one-time fee a shipper pays one load at current market pricing
- short-term transactional pricing that reflects the real-time balance of supply and demand in the market
- during the pandemic, stop rates are very high due to high demands and low supplies
- spot rates provided the carrier is normally good for 24 hours
- Best if:
    - primary and backup carriers don't accept a lane at their rate
    - urgent or unexpected shipment is needed (kinda like bounce load where we are time-sensitive I guess?)

**Contract/Primary rates**
- Longer-term (normally 12-months, but can range from quarter, 6 months, 2 years)
- Benefits:
    - consistent, reliable
    - more predictable; more stable
    - lower costs than spot rates
- Determined by:
    - Bid process
    - A shipper or customer will bid
- Bed to get contract pricing when you have a predictable freight environment
- Win-win for both carriers and shippers b/c:
    - carriers get fixed rates
    - shippers give committed load volume

### Other fees

**Fuel surcharge**
- a fee added on at the time of shipping
- Since fuel price is volatile and unpredictable, it's not reasonable to ask a carrier to lock in fuel pricing at the time of a bid
- fuel and diesel prices change and are published weekly


**Accessorials**
- fees that carriers will charge the shipper
- added at the time of shipment; normally after a shipment is delivered
- it's better for shippers to be fair with accessorials charges; you don't want to keep acc. charges way down that hurt your relationship with carriers
- hard to predict in advance
    - if you're putting them into your budget, it's best to look at last year's accessorials
- Examples
    - detention
        - delayed loading/unloading time
        - as a shipper, you can control this by looking at which facilities tend to have higher detention charges over a coruse of quarter/year
    - stop off charges
    - lumper fees
    - layovers
    - driver work
        - if driver has to assist in reworking or unloading a truck
    - lift gate
    - detention
    - lumpers


## LTL vs. Intermodal

**Process of LTL spot quote (customer's pov)**

- Variety of ways to quote by a customer:
    1. Directly with a customer rep
        - Email info like pickup address, delivery address
        - Customer rep send back a list of rates from various carriers & transit times for each rate
    2. Input information themselves on the system
        - select accessorials like lift gates, limited space, etc.

- Variables to keep in mind for pickups/dropoffs
    - some vendors only require pickups/dropoffs at certain times of the day or certain days of the week; not 24/7
    - if not communicated clearly, it incurs extra fees for delays, etc.

- At least 24-48 hour lead time for pickup is needed


**Can you negotiate rates?**

- 2019? Yes. At this moment? Nah.
- Long-term agreements may help
- Cheapest rates is not always the best!!!
    - It can be delusional because the rates may not include hidden fees (lift gates, fuel surcharges, limited pickups, etc.)
    - Reliability, Credit of the 3PL provider play a big part when deciding on which provider to choose.
    - If you choose the one with the cheapest rates, your customer may suffer and therefore in the long term, it's not ideal.

## Intermodal
- shipping freights over "rail"
- 10-15% cheaper than truckload
- Things to consider:
    - capacity
    - time, seasonality
        - During peak season (September ~ December), many imports nearby ports like LA.
        - Avoid lanes nearby those areas during peak season
    - distance (> 700 miles)
    - loads that are not time sensitive are good-fit
    - you can't change the shipment time or location during shipping process


## Mini Bid
- when there's an influx of shipments all of a sudden and primary carriers have met their commitments, you might do a mini bid to get extra capacity for a quarter or 6 months.
ds- helps keep consistency during inconsistency
- provide carriers competitive rates
- provide shippers reliable capacity

## Misc.

- The pandemic made dramatic changes in logistics industry:
    - E-commerce jumped 10 years in the last 1.5 year
        - Trying to replicate Amazon's 2 day delivery, which can't be done in a typical way ==> 3PL comes into play
- Spot quote (when customers reach out to customer rep for shipments)
    - Do
        - provide as much info as possible upfront
            - location, hours, contacts (phone #, email), lift gates, limited space, etc.
        - ask questions
            - do you need people to unload?
    - Don't
        - generalize your request
        - guesstimate the dimension or total weight of a shipment, etc.
- LTL vs truckload (TL)
    - Truckload
        - a.k.a. FTL (Full Truckload)
        - Flat rates whether the trucket is full or just one box
        - Your freight is the only shipment on the truck
        - Carrier ships straight from origin to destination
        - more pallets than LTL
        - > 10,000 lbs
        - only one destination

    - LTL
        - Less than Truck Load
        - Truck is full but with shipments from different companies/customers
        - Pay only for what you use
        - cost-effective for 150 lb < loads < 10000 lb
        - typically one to six pallets
        - Prices for an LTL shipment are determined by:
            - weight
            - pick up location
            - class
            - destination zip codes.
        - Ideal for:
            - sending pallets to two or more destinations
            - short-haul of high-volume shipments that don't meet the criteria for FTL
        - like amazon's fulfillment service where you pay for the space you use
        - Regulated by National Motor Freight Traffic Association
            - classifies freight based on commodity, density, and ease of transport
            - Standard LTL dteremiend by shipment's origin and destimation, size, and any accessorials required
- Project freight
    - freight out of a certain origin or to a certain customer
    - e.g) when there's a food roadshows, a group of carriers will move around with the show crew which is not a typical lane (could include delivery to residential area not a warehouse)

---

### Reference:
- https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=g1usE9qk-wA&list=WL&index=16&t=948s
- https://www.dtsone.com/know-difference-ltl-shipping-truckload-shipping/
